---
title: Doctrine MongoDB ODM 1.2.0 and 1.1.7 Released
authorName: Andreas Braun
authorEmail: alcaeus@alcaeus.org
categories: []
indexed: false
---
We are happy to announce the immediate availability of Doctrine MongoDB ODM
`1.2.0 <https://github.com/doctrine/mongodb-odm/releases/tag/1.2.0>`_ and
`1.1.7 <https://github.com/doctrine/mongodb-odm/releases/tag/1.1.7>`_.

MongoDB ODM 1.1.7
-----------------

Notable fixes may be found in the
`changelog <https://github.com/doctrine/mongodb-odm/blob/1.1.x/CHANGELOG-1.1.md#117-2017-10-23>`_.
A full list of issues and pull requests included in this release may be found in the
`1.1.7 milestone <https://github.com/doctrine/mongodb-odm/issues?q=milestone%3A1.1.7>`_.

What is new in 1.2.0?
---------------------

Doctrine MongoDB ODM 1.2.0 introduces the following new features:

- The ``readOnly`` mapping option allows you to map immutable documents.
- With ``slaveOkay`` being deprecated, you can now specify a ``readPreference``
  for your documents. This ``readPreference`` will automatically be applied to
  all queries for those mapped documents.
- With ``dbRef`` only offering limited support in aggregation pipeline queries,
  there's a new reference storage strategy called ``ref`` that stores references
  as objects (without "$"-prefixed field names), allowing you to use it with
  discriminators and aggregation pipeline queries.
- When mapping inverse references, you may now specify fields that will be
  primed when the reference is resolved. This saves you from writing a dedicated
  repository method for the sole purpose of priming references.
- The ``odm:schema:validate`` command validates the document mapping to help you
  spot mistakes.
- A new builder for aggregation pipeline queries, including support for
  marshalling results into read-only documents.
- Query result documents that can be used to hydrate results from an aggregation
  pipeline query. These documents cannot be written back to the database.

Upgrading to 1.2.0
------------------

The new version requires PHP 5.6. Running on PHP 7+ requires the use of a
polyfill for the legacy driver, e.g. `mongo-php-adapter <https://github.com/alcaeus/mongo-php-adapter>`_.
When running on PHP 5.6, MongoDB ODM requires version 1.6.7 or newer of the
legacy MongoDB driver.

Several features have been deprecated in this release and will be dropped in the
2.0 release. To see this, please view the `UPGRADE document <https://github.com/doctrine/mongodb-odm/blob/1.2.x/UPGRADE-1.2.md>`_.

Installation
------------

You can install the new version of MongoDB ODM by using Composer and the
following ``composer.json`` contents:

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "require": {
            "doctrine/mongodb-odm": "^1.2.0"
        }
    }

Stability and upcoming releases
-------------------------------

As of today, Doctrine MongoDB ODM ``1.2.0`` is the stable distribution. There is
no release schedule for an upcoming version yet.

``1.1.7`` is the last release of the ``1.1.x`` development line and will no
longer receive bug fixes. Instead, we will focus on developing MongoDB ODM 2.0
with native support for the new MongoDB driver. This release will require at
least PHP 7.1 and contain several BC breaking changes. To ease the migration
process, we will release a ``1.3.0`` which will be backwards compatible to
the ``1.2.x`` line and only deprecate features to be removed in 2.0. The ``1.x``
line of MongoDB ODM will not receive any new features.
