---
title: "Doctrine 2.1 Release Candidate 3"
menuSlug: blog
layout: blog-post
authorName: beberlei
authorEmail:
categories: [release]
permalink: /2011/07/02/doctrine-2-1-rc3.html
---
We released Doctrine 2.1 Release Candidate 3 after some important
changes to the new annotation reader. That is also why we didnt manage
to keep our release date of June 30th. The new date is Monday.

About the Annotations: We constantly had problems with the autoloading
of annotations through PHP autoloaders, increasing with Symfony2
starting to use the reader with enabled autoloading. The problem with
reusing the PHP autoloader can be explained easily: Not every Docblock
Annotation has a corresponding PHP class that can be instantiated by
Doctrines AnnotationReader. The question is how we detect the
annotations from the documentation related comments only. The solution
required a silent autoloader, meaning no failure should occur if an
autoload is triggered for a non-existant class. Implementing such an
autoloader has performance drawbacks though, which is why the Doctrine
does not fail silently. Autoloading annotations was not compatible with
Doctrines own class loader.

That problem is why we removed PHP autoloading completely and
reimplemented our own autoloading mechanism inside Doctrine Annotations.
Now we have much more control about when errors occur and if we skip
them or throw an exception.

See [this following Gist](https://gist.github.com/1059486) on how
autoloading annotations works. This is not relevant if you use
\$config-\>newDefaultAnnotationDriver() with the ORM though, which will
handle all the necessary bootstrapping for you.

Additionally we have changed the annotation reader in other aspects. To
be a valid annotation your class have to extend (backwards compatible
way, will be removed in 3.0.x) or contain @Annotation inside the class
level docblock.

We will update the documentation for Doctrine Common accordingly in the
next hours to allow you to understand all the changes made between 2.0
and 2.1.

If you are using Annotations either in Doctrine 2 or within your own
code please update and check the changes.
