---
title: "Doctrine MongoDB ODM 1.1.0 and 1.0.6 Released"
menuSlug: blog
layout: blog-post
controller: ['Doctrine\Website\Controllers\BlogController', 'view']
authorName: Andreas Braun
authorEmail: alcaeus@alcaeus.org
categories: []
permalink: /2016/06/09/odm-1-1-0-and-1-0-6.html
---
We are happy to announce the immediate availability of Doctrine MongoDB
ODM [1.1.0](https://github.com/doctrine/mongodb-odm/releases/tag/1.1.0)
and [1.0.6](https://github.com/doctrine/mongodb-odm/releases/tag/1.0.6).

What is new in 1.1.0?
=====================

Doctrine MongoDB ODM 1.1.0 comes with the following new features: - ODM
now supports sharded collections out of the box - Users may provide
custom implementations for 1-n associations - Fetch documents in
read-only mode - Partial indexes, which were introduced in MongoDB 3.2 -
PHP 7 support - [and much
more](https://github.com/doctrine/mongodb-odm/issues?q=milestone%3A1.1.0)

PHP 7 support
=============

Running MongoDB ODM on PHP 7 requires the new MongoDB driver
(`ext-mongodb`) which is not directly compatible with ODM. To solve
this, you can use a polyfill like
[mongo-php-adapter](https://github.com/alcaeus/mongo-php-adapter), which
provides the legacy driver API on top of the new driver. To do so, in
your PHP 7 project, add the following Composer directives in addition to
the MongoDB ODM requirement:

~~~~ {.sourceCode .json}
{
    "require": {
        "alcaeus/mongo-php-adapter": "^1.0",
        "ext-mongo": "*"
    }
}
~~~~

Upgrading to 1.1.0
==================

The new version requires PHP 5.6+; older versions are no longer
supported. If you are using an older version, please use Doctrine
MongoDB ODM 1.0.x or upgrade your PHP version. In addition to these PHP
version changes, MongoDB ODM 1.1.0 requires version 1.5 or newer of the
legacy MongoDB driver. The new MongoDB driver is supported using
polyfill (like `mongo-php-adapter` mentioned above).

To use custom collection classes, you must set a
\`persistentCollectionDir\` in the configuration. This is an optional
feature and is not required by default.

Several features have been deprecated and will be dropped in the 2.0
release: - All specific type annotations (e.g. \`@String\`) have been
deprecated. Please use the \`@Field\` annotation instead. - The
\`Increment\` type has been deprecated in favor of a storage strategy
combined with the \`Integer\` and \`Float\` type - The \`simple\` flag
for references has been replaced with \`storeAs\`, allowing more
flexibility.

Installation
============

You can install this version of MongoDB ODM by using Composer and the
following `composer.json` contents:

~~~~ {.sourceCode .json}
{
    "require": {
        "doctrine/mongodb-odm": "^1.1.0"
    }
}
~~~~

MongoDB ODM 1.0.6
=================

Notable fixes may be found in the
[changelog](https://github.com/doctrine/mongodb-odm/blob/master/CHANGELOG-1.0.md#106-2016-06-09).
A full list of issues and pull requests included in this release may be
found in the [1.0.6
milestone](https://github.com/doctrine/mongodb-odm/issues?q=milestone%3A1.0.6).

Stability
=========

As of today, Doctrine MongoDB ODM `1.1.0` is the stable distribution.
There is no release schedule for an upcoming version yet.

Due to the requirement changes introduced with MongoDB ODM `1.1.0` we
have decided to provide bug fixes as well as security fixes for MongoDB
ODM `1.0.x` for an additional 6 months. After that, `1.0.x` will no
longer be supported.
