---
title: "New Major Release: Doctrine DBAL 3.0"
authorName: Benjamin Eberlei
authorEmail: kontakt@beberlei.de
permalink: /2020/11/17/dbal-3.0.0.html
---

We have released a new major version of Doctrine DBAL, version 3.0.0. This new
major version comes almost 10 years after DBAL 2.0 was released on December
2010, then coupled into the ORM 2.0.

Today Doctrine DBAL is released independent of the ORM, thanks to Composer and
sees its new major version before the ORM.

This release was made possible foremost by
[Sergei](https://twitter.com/srgmrzv), our primary DBAL maintainer, who has
spent countless hours working on the package since 2016. Thank you!

See the [Release Notes](https://github.com/doctrine/dbal/releases/tag/3.0.0)
for a detailed list of changes.

This blog post covers a few of the major changes in a bit more detail to give
you an idea of what DBAL 3.0 looks like.

### Decouple DBAL from PDO

The major theme of DBAL 3.0 is the decoupling from PDO. Instead of copying the
API verbatim like DBAL 2.0 did, DBAL 3.0 grows it into a better, more usable
direction.

We extract all fetch-methods from the `Statement` class and moved them to a new
`Result` class that is returned from `Statement::execute`.

Old code:

```
$statement = $connection->prepare('SELECT * FROM tbl WHERE col = ?');
$statement->bindParam(1, $value);
$statement->execute();

while ($row = $statement->fetch()) {
}
```

New Code:

```
$statement = $connection->prepare('SELECT * FROM tbl WHERE col = ?');
$statement->bindParam(1, $value);
$result = $statement->execute();

while ($row = $result->fetchAssociative()) {
}
```

The Result Fetching API was improved to use more human-readable names:

```
// Old
$stmt->fetch();
$stmt->fetch(PDO::FETCH_ARRAY);
$stmt->fetchColumn();
$stmt->fetchAll();

// New
$stmt->fetchAssociative();
$stmt->fetchNumeric();
$stmt->fetchOne();
$stmt->fetchAllAssociative();
```

Many more changes have been made on the public API and also for the internals,
but these are the most visible ones.

### Upgrading to DBAL 3 from 2

DBAL 3 is a real new major release with significant changes to the public API. Depending
on your codebase a migration could require non-trivial work. However we do not intend
to leave you hanging with DBAL 2 and a future migration:

1. We intend to support DBAL 2.12 a while longer, including support for the
   upcoming PHP 8.0, so that there is no rush for you to upgrade to DBAL 3.

2. DBAL 2.12 already includes forwards compatible API changes for all the new APIs,
   so that you can migrate your code step by step to the new APIs already.

3. Deprecated methods in DBAL 2.12 are tagged with the `@deprecated` doc-block
   and static analysis tools such as Psalm, PHPStan and Phan can already help
   you detect using or calling this deprecated code in your application.

4. We intend to release another version of DBAL 2 which includes
   optional triggering of deprecation messages at runtime similar to how Symfony
   deals with deprecations.

As you can see, with these approaches it will be possible for you to smoothly migrate
your application from DBAL 2 to 3.

As a note to libraries and frameworks that need to support multiple versions of
Doctrine DBAL: We recommend you start out with DBAL 2.12 and migrate all usages
of deprecated APIs to their newer counterparts. Then once you have managed
this, you can allow 3.0 and try to get your code working with both versions.
Unfortunately this may not be possible for all cases, because we could not
provide replacement APIs for everything and some features have been dropped
between DBAL 2 and 3.
