---
title: "New Release: Doctrine DBAL 2.13.1 and 3.1.0 with important Forward Compatibility fix"
authorName: Benjamin Eberlei
authorEmail: kontakt@beberlei.de
permalink: /2021/04/19/dbal-2.13.1-3.1.0.html
---

Last month [we released DBAL
2.13.0](https://www.doctrine-project.org/2021/03/29/dbal-2.13.html) as an
important push for the ecosystem towards DBAL 3 with an extensive deprecation
and forward compatibility layer.

We made a few mistakes, given that the forward compatibility layer is quite complex.
As such we have now released Doctrine DBAL 2.13.1 and 3.1.0 with two new APIs
that improve the forward compatiblity.

The problem lies in `Statement::execute()`: 2.13.0 would return a `bool` and
3.0.0 would return a `Result` from this method. This kind of API change cannot
be handled with a forward compatibility.

As such we introduced two new APIs on `Statement` that replace `execute()`.
When the old code was:

```php
$statement = $connection->prepare('SELECT * FROM tbl WHERE col = ?');
$statement->execute();

$rows = $statement->fetchAll();
```

Then the new code is now:

```php
$statement = $connection->prepare('SELECT * FROM tbl WHERE col = ?');
$result = $statement->executeQuery();

$rows = $result->fetchAllAssociative();
```

The DBAL 2.13 forward compatiblity layer supports both versions of all code and
returns a Statement/Result hybrid that has all the APIs that the DBAL Statement
had up until version 2.12. This way you can move at your own pace from the old
to the new API in your code.

Thank you again to [mdumoulin](https://github.com/mdumoulin) for the work on
improving the forward compatiblity and to [Sergei Morozov](https://twitter.com/srgmrzv)
for the thorough reviews and comments.

Again I want to highlight the Runtime Deprecations library that we introduced
to support this migration. You can integrate this with your log stack during
development and testing:

```php
use Doctrine\Deprecations\Deprecation;
use Monolog\Logger;
use Monolog\Handler\StreamHandler;

$log = new Logger('doctrine');
$log->pushHandler(new StreamHandler('deprecations.log', Logger::INFO));

Deprecation::enableWithPsrLogger($log);
```

Or alternatively using PHPs global error handler:

```php
Deprecation::enableWithTriggerError();
```

See the [2.13 blog
post](https://www.doctrine-project.org/2021/03/29/dbal-2.13.html) for more
information about the migration to DBAL 3 and strategy recommendations.
