---
title: "New Release: Doctrine DBAL 2.13 with Deprecations and Forward Compatibility"
authorName: Benjamin Eberlei
authorEmail: kontakt@beberlei.de
permalink: /2021/03/29/dbal-2.13.html
---

We have released DBAL 2.13, what we plan to be the last minor version in the 2.x family of Doctrine DBAL.
This release includes additional forward compatibilty to DBAL 3 around
`Statement` and `Result` API and with an integration in our new
deprecations logging library.

In addition this DBAL release re-enables PHP 7.1 and 7.2 compatibility to give
as much flexibility as possible to everyone with forward compatibility.

### Statement and Result Forward Compatibility

DBAL 3.0 extracts all fetch-methods from the `Statement` class and moved them
to a new `Result` class that is returned from `Statement::execute`. We have
backported this API to 2.13 - so that you can support writing code for both
DBAL 2 and 3 at the same time.

Old code:

```php
$statement = $connection->prepare('SELECT * FROM tbl WHERE col = ?');
$statement->bindParam(1, $value);
$statement->execute();

while ($row = $statement->fetch()) {
}

$connection->executeQuery('SELECT * FROM tbl')->fetchAll();
```

New Code:

```php
$statement = $connection->prepare('SELECT * FROM tbl WHERE col = ?');
$statement->bindParam(1, $value);
$result = $statement->execute();

while ($row = $result->fetchAssociative()) {
}

$connection->executeStatement('SELECT * FROM tbl')->fetchAllAssociative();
```


The Result Fetching API was improved to use more human-readable names:

```php
// Old
$stmt->fetch();
$stmt->fetch(PDO::FETCH_ARRAY);
$stmt->fetchColumn();
$stmt->fetchAll();

// New
$result = $stmt->execute();
$result->fetchAssociative();
$result->fetchNumeric();
$result->fetchOne();
$result->fetchAllAssociative();
```

Many more changes have been made on the public API and also for the internals,
but these are the most common ones.

Thank you to [mdumoulin](https://github.com/mdumoulin) for the work on
improving the forward compatiblity.

### Deprecations Logging

We have wrestled internally for a long time with the strategy on runtime
deprecation going forward and settled on introducing a tiny abstraction on
top of `@trigger_error()`.

The reason for this abstraction is the potential for side effects caused by an
error handler and the potential overhead. We expect our deprecations to be
triggered a few hundred times in some requests as such the production overhead
must be minimal. 

This means deprecation logging is disabled by default and you must enable
it to either use `@trigger_error` or a PSR-3 compatible logger.

See the [deprecation library
README.md](https://github.com/doctrine/deprecations/) for details on how to
configure and use it.

### PHP 7.1 and 7.2 Support

A few large Doctrine DBAL deployments still support older versions of PHP that
are not officially supported anymore, but are covered by support of a few Linux
distributions.

To provide the largest possible flexibility to the ecosystem to run code with
both DBAL 2 or 3 this version of Doctrine DBAL will work again with PHP 7.1 and
7.2

### Migrate to DBAL 3

We recommend a three step strategy to move your code-base and that of your
dependents to DBAL 3. It depends if you are working on a library or
platform that is dependent upon, or if you are working on a standalone application.

For a standalone application:

1. Upgrade to DBAL 2.13 and enforce "^2.13" as a version constraint in
   composer.json
2. Enable deprecation tracking and eliminate all deprecations triggered in your
   codebase.
3. After fixing all deprecations, update composer constraint to "^3.0".
   Doctrine will upgrade to version 3 if all other dependencies you are using
   are ready as well to upgrade to version 3. If it fails, you need to identify
   and update the dependencies as well.

For a library, framework or platform:

1. Upgrade to DBAL 2.13 and enforce "^2.13" as a version constraint in
   composer.json
2. Enable deprecation tracking and eliminate all deprecations triggered in your
   codebase. Release a version so that all plugins and downstream users
   can be notified of using deprecated Doctrine DBAL directly themselves.
3. After fixing all deprecations, update composer constraint to "^2.13 | ^3.0".
   Doctrine will only upgrade to version 3 if all other dependencies you are
   using are ready as well to upgrade to version 3.

We recommend the following strategies to detect the use of deprecated code:

1. If you have an extensive test-suite, register a PSR-3 logger with Doctrine
   Deprecations to catch all deprecations while running the tests.
2. Otherwise register a PSR-3 logger with Doctrine Deprecations in development
   or staging only and collect and fix them as well you can. This could be
   done for a longer amount of time of days, weeks or months.
3. If that is not possible, register a PSR-3 logger in production. Make sure to
   eliminate high frequency deprecations quickly or call `ignoreDeprecation` to
   snooze them to avoid overhead.

When you are part of the Symfony ecosystem and use the symfony/error-handler
component, then you can also use the `trigger_error` mechanism instead of PSR-3
logging.
